---
title: "The Lathe of Heaven"
subtitle: A cautionary tale about infinite possibility.
publish: true
track: true
origin: '<a href="https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/5227047143">goodreads</a>'
tags: book, review
---

In _This Life_, philosopher Martin Hagglund makes the argument that
the very fact that the time we have to be conscious here on Earth is
limited is what gives life value, what gives it meaning. If we have
infinite time, then nothing matters. In _The Lathe of Heaven_, Le Guin
expands on this existential dialectic to explore not infinite time,
but infinite _opportunity_. When a man is given infinite opportunity,
it has the same effect—he can erase pain, but pleasure dies with it as
well. The meaning we make from life is the synthesis of these
opposites.

<img src="/images/lathe.jpeg">

The _Lathe of Heaven_ is the story of a man, George Orr, who has been
blessed with the curse of effectual dreaming. When he dreams, reality
shifts. Under governmental mandate, Orr must see a therapist after
being caught borrowing a neighbor’s scrip card—he’s exceeded his
ration of anti-onierics—drugs he takes because he fears dreaming, a
transitive fear borne from the terror of the responsibility that
manifesting reality entails. His therapist, William Haber, does not
share this fear. Instead, he is morally, despotically, compelled to
put Orr’s gift-curse to work to “fix” reality. Racism, hunger,
overpopulation, malevolent extraterrestrials, all erased. Haber, a
man, acts as God to flatten life’s curves. The book’s title itself
acts as a warning to men like Haber, but also as a presentiment to the
reader—[a misquote from the writings of Chuang
Tzu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Lathe_of_Heaven#Title):

> To let understanding stop at what cannot be understood is a high
> attainment. Those who cannot do it will be destroyed on the lathe of
> heaven.

Haber is unable to stop at what cannot be understood, and exercises
the infinite opportunity given to him through Orr. He doesn’t just
leave meaning behind as a casualty, but instead the very fabric of
reality itself. Le Guin takes to making this dialectic literal, and
Orr must race against the erasure of being and stop the encroaching
nothingness.
