---
title: "The Whale (2022)"
publish: true
track: true
origin: '<a href="https://letterboxd.com/pittma/film/the-whale-2022/">letterboxd</a>'
tags: film, review
---

<img src="/images/whale.jpeg" width="400">

In THE FOUNTAIN, Thomas has found eternity, while in _mother!_, Him
seeks it through art, a means itself to transfinitude; and now, in THE
WHALE, Aronofsky is eschewing eternity altogether. Instead, it’s
transfixed on life's finitude; Charlie is dead set on making meaning
in the immediate. Despite Protestant Christianity being a plot point,
there are more subtle religious parallels we see with Charlie
devotedly seeking forgiveness from his estranged daughter. Making
amends before death, despite it being common fodder for storytelling,
has its origins in the forgiveness we must beg God for before we come
to the end of our sinful existence. When we use the
amends-before-the-end-of-life framework for a story but we elide the
forgiveness required from God, it underscores the point that Aronofsky
misses altogether in THE FOUNTAIN, and more importantly a point missed
by religions which promise eternal life: the fact that life has a
fixed beginning and end, that our time to be conscious here on Earth
is limited, is what gives us purpose. To make amends at the end of
life is, flat out, the opposite of the lesson, despite it being
precisely the one taught to us in Bible school. To wait until there’s
no time left is to deny oneself, or those others that we may have
wronged, the amends they’re owed now; the longer we wait, the more we
subtract from our purpose, our calling, or if you’ll allow me it, from
our ability to self-actualize. Charlie waited too long, so his plot
for redemption was doomed from the beginning.
