---
title: Thinking about Equality Philosophically
published: 2021-03-27
math: true
tags: math, philosophy
---

I've a long-running obsession with the meaning of equality, generally
as it's used in type theory, and about the divide between _intensional_
equality and _extensional_ equality. I've had discussions about this
with real type theorists on IRC, and armchair theorists like myself,
and I'm consistently left unsatisfied with the outcome. It seems that
everyone has a different way of articulating this difference, and—as
I've said this before—it's been hard, at least in my experience, to
really land on a common understanding. In this post, I'm going to give
some background, then try and articulate my own way of thinking about
this, and how I think it's related to Kant's ideas about synthetic and
analytic utterances.

## I. Equality's Divide

As I alluded to above, a lot of my interest in this topic is anchored
in the distinction between intensional equality and extensional
equality. The dropping of that anchor is frankly due to the struggle
I've had myself to grasp this distinction which makes it difficult to
make headway when you're learning about type theory. To start, let's
try and give some meaningful definitions to these two types of
equality:

### Intensional equality

An _intensional_ equality is one whose definition ships with the*
theory we're working within. It's an equality that is a part of our*
_metatheory_.

Let's, for example, think about working in Agda's type theory, which
is _pretty_ damn close to vanilla Martin-Löf dependent type theory
with some inconsequential—at least for the topic at
hand—embellishments. In Agda, equality is intensional, and the
metatheory we're working within when we're writing Agda is the
language itself. So another way to think about intensionality within
Agda is that equality is _syntactic_. When we, for instance, prove
something like `x + y ≡ y + x` in Agda, we're tasked with showing the
type checker that the normal forms of the left-hand side of $$\equiv$$
is syntactically identical to the right-hand side. The thing to keep
in mind that we _don't_ have to do, is to illustrate that this is true
for all x's and y's by listing them, one by one, doing the two
additions with every possible combination of `x` and `y`, and showing
they both have the same results. If we're using the natural numbers as
the type for `x` and `y`, this task would take an infinite span of
time. Instead, we get to use induction to show that, through
reduction, the syntax on the left side **is the same** as the syntax
on the right side. This is because `≡`'s meaning is _intrinsic_ to the
theory of Agda. When we use Agda what we're using is the syntax of the
language, and that syntax comes with the notion of sameness, rather
simply in that two things are the same if they're literally the same
normalized string of characters[^normal].

[^normal]: This is a bit of an over simplification w/r/t what is
essentially an implementation detail. In practice Agda isn't literally
comparing strings of characters, but a data structure which can be
shown to a human in Agda's syntax.

## Extensional Equality

With an extensional equality, the equality isn't a part of theory, but
instead verifies the sameness of the objects created within the
theory. Take for example extensional set theory. The way to determine
that sets are equal is by determining that all of their elements are
equal. It requires enumerating all the constituent pieces and testing
them one by one, also known as "point-wise".

## Synthetic, Analytic, Intensional, Extensional

Western Philosophy's most famous lover of rules is, far and away,
Immanuel Kant.

Kant is the originator of the synthetic and analytic
divide. Essentially, an analytic sentence or expression is inherently
verifiable, e.g., "all pediatricians are doctors", while a synthetic
expression requires exterior verification, like "all pediatricians are
rich", to verify this statement, we'd have to talk with all
pediatricians, while with the former we know it to be true just by the
meaning of the words.

This is, I'd argue, very closely related to the notion of intensional
vs. extensional equality, if not just a mathematician's way of saying
the same thing that Kant was trying to say. The real question lies,
though, in what system would you use to verify this equational theory?
