---
title: "A refinement of Nietzsche's Discussion on Identity"
published: 2023-06-18
tagged: true
tags: philosophy, self
---

Below are a few paragraphs I wrote in a personal journal in the fall
of 2018. I'd just come off a weekend with my oldest friends and felt
alive and new, ready to face the adult world that I'd been avoiding at
all costs. About two years before this was written, I'd attempted to
[slog through _Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and
Schizophrenia_](https://obstacleallusion.com/blog/2019/09/deleuze/)
where I read a line from Nietzsche that its authors were
discussing. That line said something along the lines of "identity
oscillates around a fixed point". I glommed on to this and have held
close to it for years, but coming out of that weekend of juvenile
freedom, I realized that this observation was in need of refinement.

---

Identity is, through life, a convergence on some unattainable
state. The problem with Nietzsche's take is that an oscillation makes
no forward progress. Instead, we're unraveling our existence like an
infinite ball of yarn, with each revolution of the ball getting us
closer to purpose, to clarity, to zen. If we're left to oscillate
around the ball, then we never creep nearer its center. The
implication of Nietzsche's metaphor is a life without self-reflection,
or at least one without any productive reflection. Productive
reflection is the following of the thread, tracing what we know now
and using it make inferences about the paths which lie ahead. If the
center is then unattainable, then perhaps happiness is merely the act
of its pursuit, the act of continuing to follow the thread.

Nevertheless, this realization is one which I came to after a week of
living in my new skin, having removed a layer upon arrival at home. It
was fresh, pink, and unblemished. This is what leads me to believe
that happiness is simply the act of exposing a new self, one that is
slightly nearer the true Self that lies at our core. I personally
experience this as what I've deemed an "identity shift". This one was
particularly affecting, however, because it traveled with an awareness
of _why_, again reiterating that without forward progress, without a
steady convergence, the shift is merely a shift. An
oscillation. Happiness and contentment are fed by the thread we leave
behind.
