---
title: "A Week of ECM"
publish: true
track: true
home: true
tags: music
---

After a week of listening pretty much exclusively to American
Football's
[_LP3_](https://open.spotify.com/album/7ki5b310cwDVVJBevBLwdw?si%253DjatKDZjtQgaT45nkJGHNHw)
I recalled seeing in a review of _LP2_ the mentioning of their musical
kinship, or maybe better put, descendance, from Steve Reich. I pulled
up Reich's compilation, _The ECM Recordings_ and was immediately
immersed into _Music For 18 Musicians_ for my walk from the bus to the
office.

## Monday (It was actually Tuesday)

As I'd mentioned, I started the week with Reich's _Music for 18
Musicians_, and by way of serendipity, I found my brain freed from the
lines of code waiting to be reviewed to be acutely attuned to the
music in my ears right as it reached the 33-minute mark. A
Cabernet-like full body swell fills in the minuscule gaps between the
percussive 16th notes looping over one another and _Music For 18
Musicians_ becomes beautiful all at once.

## Wednesday (where "Wednesday" includes Tuesday night)

Okay, so, a few years ago I learned about Meredith Monk's _Songs of
Ascension_ and about how it was performed. [Monk and her Vocal
Ensemble occupied the spirals of Ann Hamilton's Tower's
staircase](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3Dc3mSVR3xtfU) and
literally ascended the stairs while performing the music of
_Songs_. To watch it is to plot its beauty on all its axes, however,
when only listening, one is left with merely a projection of its
intention, an abstraction of its possibility.

It's funny, now that I've watched the video again, I feel silly
recapitulating my notes from my listening to this earlier this
week. But nevertheless, that **is** why I'm doing this. I found that,
without context, Monk's music is hard to countenance. Her "vocal
explorations" really push the boundary on what I can take
seriously. Unlike [Björk, for instance, who is course not beyond
reproach in terms of
seriousness-taking](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3D75WFTHpOw8Y)
whose foray into vocal exploration with _Medulla_ is quite palatable,
insofar as any other Björk record is at least. Monk's and Björk's
angles are, quite different, though. Monk is pushing the voice's
purpose in a piece of music while Björk's angle is more
paradoxical—hers is to hide it by making it serve _all_ purposes.

_Mapping_, _Songs_' sixth track, presents with
Monk's whimsical yelps and Xenakis-like percussion. It's moments like
this that this line for me, that of seriousness-taking—which,
obviously, I've up to now been unable to give a proper title—is its
most tenuous. It's a line drawn by our experience with art, by our
_context_, like, well, most anything else, really. When pondering the
effects of this absence of context, I find myself imagining its
opposite, i.e. to have _all_ the context, about everything. Maybe this
is the distinction between a binary omniscience and something more
fluid, say, _enlightenment_. To know all is to never learn again,
the death of creativity. I'd posit that Epicureans would
say that this contextual evolution ought to be our _raison d'être_ but
I think it's more visceral than that; I'd say it how we know we're
alive at all.
