---
title: Working with the Garage Door Open
published: 2025-03-12
tagged: true
tags: meta
related: dsp-0031
garage: closed
---

When I converted this blog from the conventional reverse-chronological
ordering to something you had to follow links to get around in, like
it was a dark forest and you were wandering from tree to tree, it was
heavily influenced by the [many people who'd done it
before](https://github.com/KasperZutterman/Second-Brain). Even
"working with the garage door open" is
[borrowed](https://notes.andymatuschak.org/About_these_notes?stackedNotes=zCMhncA1iSE74MKKYQS5PBZ). I
found myself thinking again about that garage door this morning, after
a month or so of heavy notes-to-myself taking as I learned the ins and
outs of a number of new things at work, and it occurred to me that I
ought to act on that sentiment if it resonated with me so much. So
today I added a new key/value pair to post metadata called **garage**,
where I'll denote the status of a page according to its completeness
&c. I say &c. because I think the in/out of the garage concept has
more to do with than just completeness or polish; I think in a lot of
ways, it comes down to intention. Something that I intended to be for
public consumption from the beginning, an essay or blog post I set to
write intentionally, may still be a WIP, it may be completed, or
something in between, but notes that I wrote while I learned something
that I never really intended to consider as a "piece of writing"
doesn't really fit in that spectrum. Anyway, here are the states I'll
be using for the **garage** key and what they mean:

* **open**: you're just seeing me work something out in the open,
  these are notes mostly for me, it is not something that I edited or
  thought about word choice or cadence or anything like that. It may
  not "make sense" in a narrative or continuity way, but you may find
  some useful nuggets of information.
  
* **closed**: The garage door is closed and I'm not home, I'm out
  pitching this piece. Something with "**garage**: closed" was always
  intended to be for public consumption, and is---modulo the handful
  of typos I'm sure you'll find---done. A piece labeled closed is more
  like a conventional blog post.

* **light on**: A piece with public-facing intentions but is still a
  work in progress. These I don't think you'll find much of, but if
  you do it's likely because I published to get input on, and you're
  seeing the progress through the frosted glass of the garage door.

* **light off**: A piece with public-facing intentions that was
  abandoned or left unfinished.
