---
title: "On Profunctors, Abruptly"
published: 2018-02-15
math: true
tagged: true
tags: math, category theory
---

## Introduction (Theses)

If we're comfortable with the notion of a functor in Haskell, we can
intuitively infer what might be meant by a _bifunctor_.  Consider the
kind of a type that is a functor: `* -> *`. That is, it takes __one__
type as an argument and returns a type. A bifunctor's kind is one
which takes __two__ types and returns a type: `* -> * -> *`.  Its
definition looks like this:

```haskell
class Bifunctor (b :: * -> * -> *) where
  bimap :: (a -> b) -> (c -> d) -> f a c -> f b d
```

A bifunctor is useful for mapping over product types, such as `(,)`:

```haskell
instance Bifunctor (,) where
  bimap f  g (x, y) = (f x, g y)
```

Now is a good time to take note of the direction of the arrows.  We
begin with an `f a b` and end up with a `f c d`, by way of two
functions, `a -> b`, and `c -> d`. In both of their cases, the arrows
go the same direction: forward.

1. The `a -> b` follows the same path as the `f a _ -> f b _` in the
   bifunctor `f`.
1. Like the function before it, `c -> d` follows the direction of the
   functor as well `f _ c -> f _ d`.

## Antitheses

This direction-following is called _covariance_, and our Bifunctor is
called a _covariant_ functor.  However, like all good things, category
theory yields to the Hegelian Spirit and cannot achieve synthesis
without both a thesis and an antithesis[^lawvere].  We have two
antitheses two derive, so let us begin with a regression as a vehicle
to the first.

[^lawvere]: [Here's a Twitter
thread](https://twitter.com/pittma_/status/933569372768972800) from
when I discovered Lambek and Lawvere's explorations of Heraclitus's
and/or Hegel's influence on mathematics.

### Antithesis: Category

In category theory, A category $$C$$ has an opposite category wherein
the objects are the same, but the arrows are reversed.  $$C$$'s opposite
category would be denoted as $$C^{op}$$.

if this were C:

$$$$
\begin{xy}
\xymatrix{
  a \ar[r]^f \ar[d]_{g \circ f} & b \ar[dl]^g \\
  c
}
\end{xy}
$$$$

Then this would be $$C^{op}$$:

$$$$
\begin{xy}
\xymatrix{
  a & b \ar[l]_{f^{op}} \\
  c \ar[u]^{(g \circ f)^{op}} \ar[ur]_{g^{op}}
}
\end{xy}
$$$$

On to the next.

### Antithesis: Covariant

When we define a functor in a categorical sense rather than a Haskell
sense, we define it as a mapping from one category $$C$$ to another $$D$$,
whilst preserving structure: $$F : C \rightarrow D$$. To say a functor
is covariant is to state that when a functor $$F$$, for example,
represents morphisms on objects from $$C$$ in $$D$$, those morphisms'
arrows' must go the same direction that they did in $$C$$. I.e., given
$$F : C \rightarrow D$$ and our $$C$$ defined above, when we take $$f$$ into
$$D$$ with $$F$$, the arrows must respect their initial directions,
meaning the following statement must hold in $$D$$:

$$$$
F(f) : F(a) \rightarrow F(b)
$$$$

Okay, now that we have a more formal definition of a covariant
functor, let's use it a baseline to define its antithesis.
Covariant's antithesis is called _contravariant_, which, you guessed
it, is a reversal of an arrow's direction. That said, lets define a
new functor $$F' : C \rightarrow D$$, but note that $$F'$$ is
_contravariant_, meaning that the following holds in $$D$$.

$$$$
F'(f) : F'(b) \rightarrow F'(a)
$$$$

## Profunctors

Having finally met this post's desiderata, I'll present a Haskell definition of a profunctor, initially without comment.

```haskell
class Profunctor (p :: * -> * -> *) where
  dimap :: (a' -> a) -> (b -> b') -> p a b -> p a' b'
```

Take it in. Ruminate. What do you see?

Here's a more formal definition as a hint:

$$$$
P : C^{op} \times C \rightarrow D
$$$$

A profunctor is a mapping from a category $$C$$ and its opposite
$$C^{op}$$ to $$D$$.  To put this in more practical terms, a profunctor is
a bifunctor which is contravariant in one of its parameters. Let's go
back for now to the Haskell definition above for an illustration.  A
profunctor `p` starts with two functions, and a `p a b`, and ends up
with a `p a' b'`.  The functions we're given map from `a' -> a` and `b
-> b'`, respectively.  This tells us that `p`'s treatment of the first
function, the `a`'s, will be contravariant.  But how is this possible?
How could we end up with a `a'` if that's our starting point?  Let's
draw it out!

1. Our first function, which we'll call $$f$$, is `a' -> a`:

   $$$$
   \begin{xy}
   \xymatrix{
     a' \ar[r]^f & a
   }
   \end{xy}
   $$$$

1. And our next function, $$g$$,  is from `b -> b'`:

   $$$$
   \begin{xy}
   \xymatrix{
     a' \ar[r]^f & a & b \ar[dll]^g \\
     b'
   }
   \end{xy}
   $$$$

1. Now, for the sake of our explanation, let's say our third parameter
   `p a b` can be thought of as a more general way of writing the type
   of a function from `a` to `b`. We can think about it this way by
   replacing `p` with a concrete type constructor, the function type
   constructor `(->)`, to be specific.  In its case we'd write `p a b`
   as `(->) a b` or, in its more common form, `a -> b`. We'll call
   this function $$h$$:

   $$$$
   \begin{xy}
   \xymatrix{
     a' \ar[r]^f & a \ar[r]^h & b \ar[dll]^g \\
     b'
   }
   \end{xy}
   $$$$

1. There's two things I'd like to stop and make note of here.
   1. If we can call our third parameter, `p a b` a more general way
      of stating `a -> b`, then the same applies to `dimap`'s return
      type, `p a' b'`.  It can be thought of as `a' -> b'`.
   1. Let's look again at the diagram and use what we know about
      category theory's laws to discern what it would take to get a
      return type that was shaped like `a' -> b'`.  It's composition!
      To return our `p a' b'`, or remember, our `a' -> b'`, we just
      need to compose $$f$$, $$g$$, and $$h$$ in the right order: $$g \circ h
      \circ f$$:

   $$$$
   \begin{xy}
   \xymatrix{
     a' \ar[r]^f \ar[d]_{g \circ h \circ f} & a \ar[r]^h & b \ar[dll]^g \\
     b'
   }
   \end{xy}
   $$$$

And with that, you can see what makes a profunctor tick!

## In Closing

This sums up the technical section of this this post, as its purpose
was to explain what, exactly, a profunctor was, while simultaneously
sharing a manner such that makes contravariance a tractable thing.  It
was through this intuition that I personally was able to get a handle
on how to synthesize contravariance, and I hope it was helpful to
anyone who comes across this post.

## In Closing Closing

Before I `:wq` on this one, though, I want to also make mention of the
structure of the final technical section of this post.  Drawing out
the commutative diagrams one arrow at a time was huge in getting a
grasp on these concepts for me, and it's an approach I'll reach for
regularly from now on.  If it's not something you've tried before when
taking on something dense in the land of category theory, I can
certainly attest to its efficacy! Cheers!
