---
title: Some Readings on Mixins
published: 2014-05-27
tags: programming languages
---

To me, Mixins were always a simple, stateless collection of loosely
related methods that could be included in a class. I mean stateless in
that they hold no state of their own, but rather that they assume a
given state.

As an example, this is the perspective Ruby takes on the topic:

```ruby
module TestModule

   def test
     puts 'hi'
   end

 end

 class TestClass
   include TestModule
 end
```

```
irb> TestClass.new.test
irb> "hi"
```

Although quite simple, this perspective is misleading according to the
classical definition of mixins. Modern mixin's original definition
came from a paper written by Gilad Bracha and William Cook, and their
basis is this:

A mixin is an abstract subclass; i.e. a subclass definition that may
be applied to different superclasses to create a related family of
modified classes. For example, a mixin might be defined that adds a
border to a window class; this mixin could be applied to any kind of
window to create a bordered-window class.

The bulk of this research came from a paper that Richard P. Gabriel
wrote that is actually about the philosophy of science / engineering,
where context is all based around mixins. Because I'm obsessed, I went
and read the bulk of all the papers he cites while illustrating his,
"engineering comes first in computer science" theories. Although these
posts won't cover any of his fascinating perspectives on this
philosophy, I'd still definitely recommend reading his paper. He also
did a talk on the paper, or at least what inspired him to write the
paper: incommensurability.

To begin the delving into mixins, according to Gabriel, we have to
start with Warren Teitelman, a PhD candidate at MIT in 1966. More than
twenty years before the seminal Bracha and Cook paper, Teitelman wrote
his dissertation on a system called PILOT. PILOT uses something called
Teitelman called advice. Here's a reductionist explanation taken from
the paper's abstract:

Advising consists of inserting new procedures at any or all of the
entry or exit points to a particular procedure (or class of
procedures).

Teitelman's thesis is verbose ~200 pages, of which I did not read even
half. Though, in skimming through, I did stop and read all of chapter
5: Experiments With a Question Answer System. Using a couple of fairly
complex logic problems based around a parallel to McCarthy's Airport
Problem[^airport], Teitelman shows how tests and protections (for example) can
be predefined as advice, and then a function can use this advice
either before or after its invocation. It is even possible for advice
block a function from being invoked at all. The clearest example from
the paper is still a little murky to me, even after a second and third
read though, so rather than attempting to delve into the weeds, I'll
try and explain the best I can at a high level.

[^airport]: This is not the googlable "airport problem", this is why
    I've included the link to the paper where McCarthy first supposes
    the problem in 1959. One of the first of its kind.

Let's assume a function whose job is to solve a problem by recursively
running itself, and, if just the right input is given, it can get
stuck in an infinite loop. Using Teitelman's advice, a programmer can
predetermine some invariants to run at the functions entry and exit
points to test something like, "how many times have I called myself?"
or "have I adequately solved this problem and can I stop the recursive
calls?". The programmer writes these advice procedures in a generic
way so that they can be reused by any number of functions who may meet
the same requirements.

```
(tell solution1, (before number advice),
If (countf history ((solution1 -)) is greater than 2, then quit)
```

This is some code from the example above, where "number" is the number
of times the recursive function has called itself:

The user tells PILOT to modify SOLUTION1. The phrase "(before number
advice)" tells PILOT to insert this advice immediately before the
advice containing the key word "number".

The first thought to came to mind after skimming this paper was Python
decorators. Though not exactly PILOT, I do see some strong
similarities. Let's take the example above, at least the part where we
block a call to a function if its invocation count is greater than a
pre-determined value. This requires a bit of an understanding of
Python and its decorators[^decorators], but let's just assume you "get it", now
that I've briefly described PILOT.

[^decorators]: Python decorators are this thing where functions can be
    passed as parameters to generic functions that utilize the
    __call__() method on the type Function. Reminds me, in a way, to a
    Ruby function that takes a block (Proc).

First we'll set up a class whose constructor accepts a function and a
count. The class then sets these properties as instance variables.

```python
class Decorator(object):

    def __init__(self, func, count = 0):
        self.count = 0 or count
        self.func = func
```

Next, we'll override the `__call__()` method on the class. This is the
method that is invoked on a decorator.

```python
def __call__(self):
     self.count += 1
     if self.count < 5:
         self.func()
     else:
         print 'not calling'
```

And last, we define a recursive method, and decorate it with our
`Decorator` class.

```python
@Decorator
 def recurse():
     print 'recurse called'
     recurse()
```

As expected, the decorator blocks the call once count is greater than
five. Output:

```
recurse called
recurse called
recurse called
recurse called
not calling
```
 
On `recurse()`'s fifth invocation, it is not invoked, and the program
exits. To me, this is exactly the type of invariant that Teitelman is
describing in the PILOT examples. While not quite aligned with the
modern perspective of multiple-inheritance based mixins, this is a
clear precursor to the type of reusable, common functionality we
understand as mixins today; at least on a much smaller (per function)
scale.

(On a side note, how cool is that the same instance is passed to each
call to `Decorator`. I was surprised that it was this simple to
implement.)

Up next in the mixin rabbit trail is Flavors, another Lisp based
precursor to the Bracha and Cook paper, similar in pattern (before and
after), but quite different in concept.
