---
title: "Vibin'"
origin: '<a href="https://pittma.substack.com/p/rhizome-no-i-vibin">substack</a>'
tags: math, category theory, philosophy
---

In the summer of 2017 A friend sent me a job posting from The Orange
Website and said that it looked like a thing I’d be interested in. It
was about 9 p.m. on a Wednesday, and being that you can find me on
just about any Wednesday at 9 p.m. sitting here, at the bar in my
kitchen, typing on this computer, with a beer or two in my belly, I
took it upon myself to whip up a CV and apply.

Thanks to those beers, my CV was snarky, even silly in some places. It
landed in the lap of a person with exactly the right disposition for
this levity, and in a matter of a few months I was writing a
valedictions email to soon-to-be ex-coworkers and starting a
completely new adventure.

At this job, I spent my days reading, writing, and researching ways to
integrate software verification techniques, particularly dependent
type theories, into the practice of writing programs in a language
whose ontology was to _run_, not to _verify_. It was the closest I
ever got to research-as-work—to the experience of a PhD recipient.

While I was there, I met an incredible group of people, some of whom
have come to be amongst my closest friends. Outside of work, we’d
quibble about literature or philosophy, and they’d humor me when I
wanted to soliloquy about profunctors.

Like all good things, this had to come to an end. We were unexpectedly
sent our separate ways, and I lost touch with this new
research-as-work identity-appendage I’d grown. The next job left it to
atrophy and I’ve all but forgotten what the beautiful experience of
connecting neurons for money felt like. Until this week.

This week, all at once, a friend told me about he and his partner
talking with one another about when I was finally going to get a PhD,
which prompted me to reëxplore the work of Peli Grietzer, a
mathematician and philosopher—literally mathematized philosophy and
literary criticism—who’s responsible for the theme of this month’s
newsletter. Simultaneously, I read a chapter of the home-schooling
book _The Call of the Wild and Free_ about cultivating a family
culture, and it hit me. It leveled me like a falling tree. I’m
lost. I’ve lost touch with my own vibe.

---

Peli Grietzer’s The [_Theory of
Vibe_](https://www.glass-bead.org/article/a-theory-of-vibe/) equates
the semiotic[^semiotic] system derived from a type of AI called an autoencoder to
the semiotics of a universe created in a work of literature:

[^semiotic]: Semiotics is the study of signs and symbols. We talk
    about semiotics here because what’s fed into the autoencoder
    signifies something, for instance a handwritten word that
    signifies an object like “tree”, and what comes out signifies that
    originally input signifier.

> Suppose that when a person grasps a style or vibe in a set of worldly
> phenomena, part of what she grasps can be compared to the formulae of
> an autoencoder trained on this collection.

An autoencoder is a part of a neural network that reduces the patterns
in its training set to a discretized and necessarily less precise
representation and then back again with the goal of there being zero
errors on the “back again” side. Those from that training set that it
can roundtrip without error are called its canon.

Grietzer wants to make the connection that this “canon” of an
autoencoder—which is the same thing as talking about the autoencoder
itself—is the same idea that one gets from an aesthetically consistent
universe created in a work of literature. He calls this a _vibe_.

That is, a _vibe_ is the set of things the reader can recognize,
without error, as aesthetically consistent.

This, to me—both the autoencoder and the literary vibe—sound related
to Deleuze and Guattari’s smooth and striated spaces dichotomy. D&G
wrote about this dichotomy in A Thousand Plateaus, the second volume
of their Capitalism and Schizophrenia series. To them, smooth spaces
are heterogeneous and continuous, and also untainted by a State
Apparatus; while a striated space is homogeneous and discretized, and
that discretization is, often times, done by the state. As an example,
consider the idea of property “ownership”. Land itself is continuous,
but a State Apparatus parcels it out and identifies it. Hell, it even
homogenizes it with zoning laws.

I’d like to apply this notion of smooth and striated to both
autoencoders and vibes. For an autoencoder, mapping smoothness and
striation onto its two ends is obvious: an autoencoder’s canon is the
set of “smooth” objects it encodes into a “striated” representation
and then decodes without loss. However, the “vibe” of a work of
art—particularly a work of literature—is more subtle.

Earlier I mentioned that an autoencoder is, mathematically speaking,
the same thing as its canon. Grietzer covers this point early in _The
Theory of Vibe_:

> A trained autoencoder and its canon are effectively mathematically
> equivalent: not only are they roughly logically equivalent, it is also
> fast and easy to compute one from the other.

So let’s look at the autoencoder as a function, one that takes
representations of smooth spaces and in return outputs striated
ones. In this light, what is the vehicle for turning an artist’s brain
into a vibe?

_Language_.

Language is the function that translates the smooth space of
unarticulated thought into an essence that an independent being—the
reader—can interpret. That essence is _meaning_. I’d posit that
Grietzer’s “vibe”, that canon of an artist-recognizable sort, is the
lexicon that that artist employs to articulate their thoughts.

Mathematically, we’d think of this as, rather than a function’s
codomain or range, its _image_—the specific subset of possible results
of a function, as opposed to the class of objects that those results
lie in. When we detect that vibe it’s because we’re familiar with,
well, that artist’s canon.

The space (this is a math pun) we’ve reached is rich with study, this
idea of roundtripping from higher to lower and back to higher
“resolutions” or dimensionality has many names: section / retraction,
Galois connection, but the most general notion is a categorical idea
called adjunction. An autoencoder’s input would be right adjoint to
its output. And if that’s the case, then by Grietzer’s own line of
thinking, a vibe would be left adjoint to the author’s mind. We’re
getting into deeply hand-wavy territory now, but it's not entirely
untrodden. Category theory has been used in linguistics for years now,
most interestingly (to me) in distributional semantics. Distributional
semantics’ raison lies in using the distribution of a word amongst
others to determine its meaning or synonyms. Words that are often seen
in similar positions are thought to have similar meanings[^meaning]. Maybe a
distributional model over an artist’s canon could suss out that
artist’s vibe? Maybe there’s meaning to be given to adjunction in the
categorical model of distributional semantics?

[^meaning]: It’s more subtle than this and it involves not just
    position but also predicates that can make distinctions in the
    face of polysemy.

Maybe it’s actually that a vibe, as relayed through the striated space
of language, is right adjoint to language itself, capturing the
author’s mind at a point and relayed to you, reader, in a form that
you can internalize into your own smooth space, only to map it again
to your own vibe when you relay it to a friend, and so on and so on,
always and forever, composed eternally.

At least until you forget.
