---
title: Hi, I'm dan
published: 2024-01-03
---

I'm a curious exister living in Portland, OR. I'm also a dad and a
husband who currently programs computers for a living. My interests
over the years have spanned from type theory to cryptography and from
distributed consensus to embedded systems.


I've tried probably a dozen platforms, approaches, and styles for
places for me to exorcize my thoughts, to emanate my vibe, but nothing
has ever felt quite right. The purpose of this site is for me to do
just that, but to do it untethered from a need to defend or justify
any of the connections I find in my head. Think of it as a mapâ€”a place
to trace any and all of my [lines of
flight](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Line_of_flight).

If I've learned anything through everything I've tried, it's that I'm
not really a writer, I'm actually just a blogger. I've tried to
categorize everything I've written by finding the right outlet for
each little fracture of myself I'm shining light on with any given
piece of writing, trying desperately to keep one identity from
reflecting another. But it turns out what I really need to do to be a
whole person is to put all the fractures together into a singular
mirror, so that's what you'll find here. I collected all the writing
I've done on the Internet over the last 10 years or so (going back to
2014) and dropped them here, incongruences, fleeting interests, and
all.
