---
title: "An Algebraic Data Type's Monad"
math: true
tags: math, category theory
---

I watched Dr. Emily Riehl's Compose Conf talk[^riehl] last night and a
new intuition emerged.  The purpose of the talk was to explicate the
categorical notion of a monad, and while watching it, I was struck
with the realization of how a monad arises from an algebraic data
type.

[^riehl]: [A Categorical View of Computational
    Effects](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6t6bsWVOIzs)

## Prereqs

In her talk, she first discusses $$T$$ as a computation, and defines a
$$T$$ as a monad: something that can take an $$A$$ and lift it to a
$$T(A)$$, like this:

$$$$
A \rightarrow T(A)
$$$$

_NB: There is another operation that comes with a monad, `bind`, but
we'll skip that for now._

The canonical example used through the first half of the talk is a
$$\text{List}$$: A function from $$A \rightarrow T(A)$$ could be a
function from an $$A$$ to a $$List$$ of $$A$$'s where $$T$$ is the
_computation_ which constructs a list of $$A$$'s. That is, $$A
\rightarrow T(A)$$ is simply a more general version of $$A \rightarrow
List(A)$$.

She goes on to use the notation of $$\leadsto$$ to denote a "program"
which contains one of these lift operations, but with $$\leadsto$$, we
elide the $$T$$:

$$$$
A \rightarrow T(B) = A \leadsto B
$$$$

This notation is meant to denote a "weak" map between $$A$$ and $$B$$,
in that it's not a complete $$A \rightarrow B$$, due to the fact that
it requires the computation $$T$$. This lift from $$A$$ to $$T$$ of
$$B$$ is called a _Kleisli_ arrow.

## An ADT Monad

Later in the talk, she defines a function from $$A$$ to $$A + \bot$$:

$$$$
A \rightarrow A + \{\bot\}
$$$$

This should look familiar—it contains a $$+$$ after all! It's an
algebraic data type (ADT)—a sum type to be specfic. It can give us
either an $$A$$ or $$\bot$$; $$\bot$$ means "bottom" or `false` in
this context. It would look something like this in Haskell:

```haskell
data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a

f :: a -> Maybe a
``` 

And as we know, `Maybe` admits a monad where if we have an `a`, we
apply our lift to it to get a `Just a`. In Haskell, this lift is
called `return`, and made available in the Monad typeclass:

```haskell
return :: Monad m => a -> m a
```

Which, if we squint, looks an awful lot like `A -> T(A)`.  For
edification purposes, our definition of `return` for `Maybe` and the
other requisite pieces of a Monad in Haskell are below.

```haskell
instance Monad Maybe where
  return = Just
  (Just x) >>= f = f x
  Nothing >>= _ = Nothing
```

If you're still squinting, you can start to see how:

* Our ADT becomes $$T$$, the _computation_ which can give us either
  our `a`, or `Nothing`.
* Using Dr. Riehl's notation, we could denote `f` mathematically as
  $$f : A \leadsto A$$
