---
title: A test note, which does all the things
subtitle: Should be discarded before publishing the forest.
related: dsp-0007 dsp-0018
origin: '<a href="https://pittma.substack.com/p/how-to-pitch-a-tent">substack</a>'
tags: self, god
math: true
---

# A H1 title

A few years ago, as my first foray into philosophy as a Real Adult, I
attempt to power my way through Deleuze and Guattari's _AntiOedipus:
Capitalism and Schizophrenia_. It didn't go particularly well. I think
I understood that there was something revolutionary about it, about
escaping oppressive hierarchies imposed on us by the Oedipal Triangle,
but the lyrical language can be, at times, nearly impossible to
follow. I gave up about half-way through.

$transclude("dsp-0005")$

## Homotopy Type Theory

Homotopy Type Theory is many things, and its existence has many
elegant applications, but for the purpose at hand, I'm going to cover
just the parts which we need to begin to think about the real
numbers. To begin, why _Homotopy_ Type Theory?

### 2.1 Homotopies

In topology, a _homotopy_ is a mathematical object which _bends_ one
function into another. More formally:

Given two functions which map between spaces $$X$$ and $$Y$$:

$$$$
f,\ g : X \rightarrow Y
$$$$

A homotopy $$H$$ is a function[^ri]:

[^ri]: Where $$[0, 1]$$ denotes the _real interval_, the continuous
      and transfinite sequence of the real numbers between $$0$$ and
      $$1$$.


$$$$
H : [0, 1] \times X \rightarrow Y
$$$$


Such that

$$$$
H(0, X) = f
$$$$

And

$$$$
H(1, X) = g
$$$$

$$$$
\xymatrix{
  A \ar[r]_f & B \ar@{.>}@/_1pc/[l]_{f^{-1}} \ar[d]_g \\
  & C \ar@{.>}@/_1pc/[u]_{g^{-1}}
}
$$$$

<div class="multiline-quote">
[A] functor $$F: C \to D$$ between categories is called a fibration if
for every morphism $$f: X \to Y$$ in the codomain category D and for
every object $$X$$ in the domain category $$C$$, there exists:

1. An object $$\text{fib}(f)$$ in $$C$$, called the "fiber" or "preimage"
   of $$f$$ under $$F$$, and
1. A morphism $$p(f): \text{fib}(f) \to X$$ in $$C$$, called the 
   "lifting" or "pullback" of $$f$$ along $$F$$, such that $$F(p(f)) = f$$.
</div>

<p class="pull">What is a computer besides a territorializer of
electrons, anyway?</p>

> The truth is, no matter how I try and metaphorize it, Chris’
> experience and mine are the self-same. The reason watching a
> particularly chaotic set—even when displaced by the abstraction of a
> screen—can move me to tears is because it is literally scratching my
> soul. I lost God at church, but I found him in hardcore.

I'll add that link by typing <kbd>ctrl</kbd> +
<kbd>c</kbd><kbd>ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>l</kbd> (`C-c C-l`) then start to
type `file` which gives me this menu (I'm using
[Helm](https://emacs-helm.github.io/helm/)):
