---
month: July 2020
title: "July 2020: Vibin'"
back: true
publish: true
---

In the summer of 2017 A friend sent me a job posting from The Orange
Website and said that it looked like a thing I'd be interested in. It
was about 9 p.m. on a Wednesday, and being that you can find me on
just about any Wednesday at 9 p.m. sitting here, at the bar in my
kitchen, typing on this computer, with a beer or two in my belly, I
took it upon myself to whip up a CV and apply.

<!--more-->

Thanks to those beers, my CV was snarky, even silly in some places. It
landed in the lap of a person with exactly the right disposition for
this levity, and in a matter of a few months I was writing a
valedictions email to soon-to-be ex-coworkers and starting a
completely new adventure.

At this job, I spent my days reading, writing, and researching ways to
integrate software verification techniques, particularly dependent
type theories, into the practice of writing programs in a language
whose ontology was to _run_, not to _verify_. It was the closest I
ever got to research-as-work—to the experience of a PhD recipient.

While I was there, I met an incredible group of people, some of whom
have come to be amongst my closest friends. Outside of work, we'd
quibble about literature or philosophy, and they'd humor me when I
wanted to soliloquy about profunctors.

Like all good things, this one had to come to an end. We were
unexpectedly sent our separate ways, and I lost touch with this new
research-as-work identity-appendage I'd grown. The next job left it to
atrophy and I've all but forgotten what the beautiful experience of
connecting neurons for money felt like. Until this week.

This week, all at once, a friend told me about he and his partner
talking with one another about when I was finally going to get a PhD,
which prompted me to reëxplore the work of Peli Grietzer, a
mathematician and philosopher—literally mathematized philosophy and
literary criticism—who's responsible for the theme of this month's
newsletter. Simultaneously, I read a chapter of the home-schooling
book _The Call of the Wild and Free_ about cultivating a family
culture and it hit me. It leveled me like a falling tree. I'm
lost. I've lost touch with my own vibe.

---

## Vibin'

Peli Grietzer's [_The Theory of
Vibe_](https://www.glass-bead.org/article/a-theory-of-vibe/) equates
the semiotic[^1] system derived from a type of AI called an
autoencoder to the semiotics of a universe created in a work of
literature:

> Suppose that when a person grasps a style or vibe in a set of
> worldly phenomena, part of what she grasps can be compared to the
> formulae of an autoencoder trained on this collection.

An autoencoder is a part of a neural network that reduces the patterns
in its training set to a discretized and necessarily less precise
representation and then back again with the goal of there being zero
errors on the "back again" side. Those from that training set that it
can roundtrip without error are called its _canon_.

Grietzer wants to make the connection that this "canon" of an
autoencoder—which is the same thing as talking about the autoencoder
itself—is the same idea that one gets from an aesthetically consistent
universe created in a work of literature. He calls this a _vibe_.

That is, a _vibe_ is the set of things the reader can recognize,
without error, as aesthetically consistent.

This, to me—both the autoencoder and the literary vibe—sound related
to Deleuze and Guattari's smooth and striated spaces dichotomy. D&G
wrote about this dichotomy in _A Thousand Plateaus_, the second volume
of their Capitalism and Schizophrenia series. To them, smooth spaces
are heterogeneous and continuous, and also untainted by a State
Apparatus; while a striated space is homogeneous and discretized, and
that discretization is, often times, done _by_ the state. As an
example, consider the idea of property "ownership". Land itself, is
continuous, but a State Apparatus parcels it out and identifies
it. Hell, it even homogenizes it with zoning laws.

I’d like to apply this notion of smooth and striated to both
autoencoders and vibes. For an autoencoder, mapping smoothness and
striation onto its two ends is obvious: an autoencoder’s canon is the
set of “smooth” objects it encodes into a “striated” representation
and and then decodes without loss. However, the “vibe” of a work of
art—particularly a work of literature—is more subtle.

Earlier I mentioned that an autoencoder is, mathematically speaking,
the _same thing_ as its canon. Grietzer covers this point early in
_The Theory of Vibe_:

> \[A\] trained autoencoder and its canon are effectively
> mathematically equivalent: not only are they roughly logically
> equivalent, it is also fast and easy to compute one from the other.

So let's look at the autoencoder as a function, one that takes
representations of smooth spaces and in return outputs striated
ones. In this light, what is the vehicle for turning an artist's brain
into a vibe?

_Language_.

Language is the function that translates the smooth space of
unarticulated thought into an essence that an independent being—the
reader—can interpret. That essence is _meaning_. I'd posit that
Grietzer's "vibe", that canon of an artist-recognizable sort, is the
lexicon that that artist employs to articulate their
thoughts.

Mathematically, we'd think of this as, rather than a function's
codomain or range, its _image_—the specific subset of possible results
of a function, as opposed to the class of objects that those results
lie in. When we detect that vibe it's because we're familiar with,
well, that artist's canon.

The space (this is a math pun) we've reached is rich with study, this
idea of roundtripping from higher to lower and back to higher
"resolutions" or dimensionality has many names: section / retraction,
Galois connection, but the most general notion is a categorical idea
called adjunction. An autoencoder's input would be "left adjoint" to
its output. And if that's the case, then by Greitzer's own line of
thinking, a vibe would be right adjoint to the author's
mind. We're getting into deeply hand-wavy territory now, but its not
entirely untrodden. Category theory has been used in linguistics for
years now, most interestingly (to me) in distributional
semantics. Distributional semantics' raison lies in using the
distribution of a word among others to determine its meaning or
synonyms. Words that are often seen in similar positions are thought
to have similar meanings[^2]. Maybe a distributional model over an
artist's canon could suss out that artist's vibe? Maybe there's
meaning to be given to adjunction in the categorical model of
distributional semantics?

Maybe it's actually that a vibe, as relayed through the striated space
of language, is right adjoint to language itself, capturing the
author's mind at a point and relayed to you, reader, in a form that
you can internalize into your own smooth space, only to map it again
to your own vibe when you relay it to a friend, and so on and so on,
always and forever, composed eternally.

At least until you forget.

---

## Read

* [The Money Printers _The Baffler_
  No. 52](https://thebaffler.com/salvos/the-money-printers-denison)

  A circuitous articulation of MMT: Modern Monetary Theory. MMT is an
  economic model that lives by the rule that a state that issues, and
  has a monopoly on, a fiat currency can _never run out of
  money_. I've also started Stephanie Kelton's book on this topic,
  [_The Deficit
  Myth_](https://www.amazon.com/Deficit-Myth-Monetary-Peoples-Economy/dp/1541736184),
  so expect to see more about this in future iterations of this crazy
  thing.

* [Yoneda : Category Theory :: Extensionality : Set Theory](https://twitter.com/andrejbauer/status/1286336084067209221)

  I've a long running obsession with the myriad uses of the word
  "extensionality" in philosophy, linguistics, and mathematics. This
  is yet another—in set theory extensionality says that two sets are
  equal if they have the same elements. The [Yoneda Lemma does too, but
  it's a longer road](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Yoneda+lemma#idea).

* [Univalent Foundations: No Comment](https://mathematicswithoutapologies.wordpress.com/2015/05/13/univalent-foundations-no-comment/)

  [The Univalent Foundations for
  Mathematics](https://homotopytypetheory.org/book/) is a cadre of
  mathematicians, computer scientists, and proof theorists who posit a
  new foundation for (pure[^3]) mathematics called Homotopy Type
  Theory, usurping the current crown, set theory. This post and,
  ironically, the dozens of comments, contain a few famous
  mathematicians and UFers squaring off (damned politely). Even
  without the mathematical context it's a good read from a philosophy
  of mathematics perspective, specifically because of the stated
  ontologies and motivations for HoTT.

---

## Listen

* [Pig Destroyer - _The Octagonal Stairway_](https://pigdestroyer.bandcamp.com/album/the-octagonal-stairway)

  I'm looking forward to this one.

* [Joshua Ray Walker - _Glad You Made
  It_](https://statefairrecords.com/?post_type=product&s=glad%20you%20made%20it%20)

  Watch the video for
  [_Voices_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fZqrQ-MdJcE) and be
  paralyzed against not buying this record.

* [Usnea - _Portals into Futility_](https://usneadoom.bandcamp.com/album/portals-into-futility)

  I've worn this one out the last few years. It's been in steady
  rotation again for the last week or two.

---

This is the first one of these, ideally the first of many. My goal is
for them to take the same form as this one, and in general just be an
unorganized collection of thoughts that I'll attempt to thread a
needle of coherence through.

I'd said that I felt lost, and left that dangling. I think the
important thing that I need you, dear reader, and myself to remember
is that this whole endeavor isn't meant to be my map with a route
planned out, but instead to be my compass—a companion on unplanned
trip that I can have a dialogue with and that can tell me whether I'm
headed, generally, in the right direction.

dan

P.S.

While I was doing some research for this post I reëncountered D&G's
Rhizome concept, a concept borrowed from botany that describes the
seemingly unorganized fashion that some plants send out roots and
shoots. D&G said, in _ATP_, that the "image of thought" was
rhizomatic. This newsletter will be a cross-section into my own
rhizome, and I can't thank you enough for making it this far. Until
next month!

[^1]: _Semiotics_ is the study of signs and symbols. We talk about
    semiotics here because what's fed into the autoencoder signifies
    something, for instance a handwritten word that signifies an
    object like "tree", and what comes out signifies that originally
    input signifier.
[^2]: It's more subtle than this and it involves not _just_ position
    but also predicates that can make distinctions in the face of
    polysemy.
[^3]: Possibly also applied mathematics, but I know less than nothing
    about that.
