---
month: August 2020
title: "August 2020: Worship"
publish: true
back: true
---

_When God closes a door, he opens a window for us to jump out of._

<!--more-->

In the spring of 2013, Meg and I started attending at a small, young
church in our neighborhood in East Dallas. Meg and I had been proper
parents for a little over a year—Olivia had been earth-side since
February 2012—and we were on the prowl for fellow new parents. It's a
strange time in a person's life, that first year as a parent. You're
constantly reädjusting while desperately seeking consistency. When
they say that becoming a parent completely uproots your existence and
identity, they don't mean that it uproots them and then re-plants them
somewhere else. No, your identity is now in the bed of a truck, then
maybe a train, eventually landing somewhere to be replanted long
enough to take hold, to be strong enough to stand on its own only to
be uprooted again, then resold to someone pushing an orange cart at a
Home Depot who plans to put you in their own garden, call you theirs,
and not give a fuck whether or not you used to play the drums in a
band.

This church seemed to have exactly what we were looking for. In fact,
the music pastor and his wife we'd observed, or at least I had, and
they seemed like cool folks, which is of course to say that they
seemed like us. When I learned that they were the welcome committee, I
almost _engineered_ a meeting, saying we Were New Here with the
intention to reluctantly mention that I was a drummer. They took us to
dinner, and, as I recall, the evening went exactly as planned. Within
a few weeks, I was playing drums in the band on Sunday mornings. I can
remember the rehearsal for the first Sunday I played, there was a song
with an front-of-the-overalls sized pocket and I was buried like
week-old lint in it. He told me, “yeah, so, there's ‘in the pocket’,
and then there's ‘_in the pocket_’. I think… you're dragging.” He was
right.

---

Come April, we'd begun to plan a big Easter service. When we'd started
at the church, it met in a public elementary school's auditorium. The
school was a mid-century relic nestled behind 100 year-old oak trees,
and the sidewalks had cracked to the trees' whims. The auditorium was
ninety-eight per cent hardwood—the floor, the stage, the folding
theater chairs. The other two per cent was velvet and iron,
respectively hiding the unkempt borders of the stage and creakily
folding the chairs, some of whom had seen their last fold. Only a few
weeks before Easter, as rigid as the velvet and iron they chartered,
the school district chose not renew the church's lease; we needed to
find somewhere else to worship. We soon found ourselves using a
different school's auditorium—a private school's. Its auditorium was
all glass and steel and linoleum. It bordered a huge public park, one
that had the tendency to flood during the Texas prairie flash-flood
thunderstorms.

Easter is the most important holiday to a Christian. On Easter, Christ
is believed to be risen from the dead, to have _defeated_ death, to
have paid for our sins and paved the way for our salvation. The church
planned to rent out the bordering park and have its Easter service
there with the unspoken goal that the message would be loud enough,
literally, to be heard by the whole East Side. A stage was built. It
was one of those rubber and steel contraptions that look like someone
had disassembled a 10-story crane and re-fashioned it, tires and all,
into a stage. We transported a sound board and its serpentine
companion outside. I arrived on the scene at 0715—the service was at
1000—and began to unload my drums from the back of my Honda
hatch-back.

The place was bustling. It seemed like the whole church was already
there, their hands busy in service, repeatedly turning to those whose
lives themselves were objects of service, and saying, “what next?” The
sun had begun to peek through a layer of Spring clouds like it was
searing a hole in them in service to God who was determined to see
what we were up to. The grass at the basin of the park glistened with
dew, turning it into a field of interspersed gold and green, it was
like King Midas, turning what it could reach into precious metal. I
nervously opened one drum case at time, starting with the hardware, as
I'd done hundreds of times before. When I was asked, “how can I help?”
all I could think to say was, “where should I park my car?” This
resulted in my car being moved _for_ me, and for my keys to no longer
be on my person. Once everything was racked and secured, once I'd made
all of the micro-adjustments that are necessary, I set a pair of
sticks on my bass drum, a pair on my snare, and joined the ”what
next?” gestalt. I was assigned a broom and I swept the cement floor of
a covered picnic area.

A few minutes later, someone came to find me. It had begun to sprinkle
a little, and they wanted to know, did I need to do anything to
protect my drums. I followed them back out to the stage and we took my
drums, a piece at a time, under the cover of the picnic area I'd just
swept. Then, in an instant, thunder cracked the sky open and that
dappling sunlight was sucked in. A thunderstorm rolled over the park
and darkened the sun-kissed grass, removing its luster like time in
reverse, turning diamonds back to coal. Not long after, the bottom
dropped out of the storm, and sheets of water were falling from the
sky. Time moved in reverse for us too: set-up became tear-down—all of
the gear and the chairs and the food and the bibles were going _back_
into trucks and boxes. The congregation moved as one, in perfect,
ineffable synchrony, to transport our entire service back inside the
school. Maybe Pastor Jeff made the call, but I didn't hear it. It was
as if all of their minds were changed in a second, like bees in a
hive, and everyone knew just what to do next.

By 0945 we had a bare setup on stage inside the school. We'd
sound-checked, but I don't remember having time to do a run-through of
the set. Normally, my drums would be rear stage right and behind
paneled glass to tame sound so that it may be controlled by
electricity rather than left to the unpredictability of the room's
acoustics and the drummer's inconsistency. This time, though, I was
dead-center, no shield, and dripping wet. We all were. The whole
church was there, soaked to the bone in their Easter pastels and
humming with an electricity before a single note was played or a
single word said.

---

Worship music in the modern church, particularly those that call
themselves non-denominational or “bible” churches is a fascinating
capitalist machine. The songs are, in effect, ballads to God, and
often times are not performed, or at least _made famous_ by their
authors. Instead, there is an elite group of worship leaders who play
the songs written by other lesser-known artists. What follows is that,
due to the reach—which one could also interpret as _power_—that this
elite group has, these songs end up trickling all the way back down to
individual churches and their worship pastors in the impossible
geometric configuration of an unclosed circle. The songs, as they're
on their journey, receive a number of small changes here and there;
they're perfected in their manipulative power and scrubbed clean of
any ambiguity, because ambiguity is the fodder of doubt.

One such song that's received this treatment is the song _How He
Loves_ by John Mark McMillan. McMillan is a Christian song-writer, but
up until well after after _How He Loves_ was released, operated
entirely independently, entirely _outside_ of the Christian Music
Industrial Complex. _How He Loves_ is a heartbreaking song that
McMillan wrote following the death of a close friend. It paints a
picture of the indescribable power of God's love:

> When all of a sudden <br>
> I am unaware of these afflictions, eclipsed by glory <br>
> And I realize just how beautiful You are <br>
> And how great your affections are for me

The chorus then goes on to repeat, “Whoa, how he loves us so”, first
at a lower register, then later it's belted an octave up, movingly so.

In the second verse, McMillan sounds like he's talking himself into
his faith, like so many us have following a tragedy that stands in the
way of the acceptance of His benevolence.

> So heaven meets Earth like a sloppy wet kiss <br>
> And my heart turns violently inside of my chest <br>
> I don't have time to maintain these regrets <br>
> When I think about the way <br>
> He loves us

It's not that tragedy makes you doubt God's benevolence, it's that it
makes you doubt that he exists at all. God, we're taught, is
omniscient. To me, the logic that follows from an omniscient God leads
to the conclusion that all events are predetermined, in fact, this is
how the Calvinists saw the world. However, on the other hand, when
face to face with devastation, it's at the same time impossible to see
the world as anything other than cold, impartial, and entropic. These
two notions are in contradiction with one another, and when faced with
a contradiction, the only path forward to to accept that one of the
two contradictory propositions must be false. For me, it was that the
ontological proposition of an omniscient God must be false. In the
face of tragedy, the conclusions I drew from my reality were too
overwhelming to retain my faith. I couldn't hate God, I but I also
couldn't accept him.

Near the end of the song, barely able to finish the lines, McMillan
mentions his friend by name.

> Oh, I thought about You the day Stephen died <br>
> And You met me between my breaking <br>
> I know that I still love You, God <br>
> Despite the agony

It's these two verses that are so powerful and so rich with emotion
that make _How He Loves_ what it is. To hear McMillan audibly cry and
to cry out to God is to be him, to be anyone who's suffered
catastrophic loss. It is to feel the lines “I know that I still love
you God / despite the agony” and to feel their implication, that he,
at some point, asked himself the question, “Can I still love the God
who lets this tragic thing happen?” The lines that follow contain his
answer.

> Listen, people, they want to tell me You're cruel <br>
> But if Stephen could sing <br>
> He'd say it's not true <br>
> 'Cause He loves us

The record on which _How He Loves_ appears was released independently
in 2005. It spent no time on any charts, Christian music or otherwise,
and, aside from _How He Loves_, is frankly unremarkable. Then, an
insider—David Crowder and his David Crowder Band—recorded a cover of
_How He Loves_ for their 2009 release _Church Music_. _Church Music_
peaked on the US Contemporary Christian Music charts at number
eleven. In Crowder's version, the last verse, the one claiming victory
over doubt, is cut altogether. The line “So heaven meets Earth like a
sloppy wet kiss” became “So heaven meets Earth like an unforeseen
kiss” because the church cannot seem to untangle sensuousness from
prurience. The frayed edges of McMillan's broken heart had been
selvedged away into marketable and unthreatening copy. I want to know
McMillan's God, but I was brought up on Crowder's.

---

That Sunday, we played _How He Loves_. We played it as it was meant to
be played. It was the last song in the set, and the congregation was
already lay prostrate at God's feet on account of the morning's
events, and _How He Loves_ broke their hearts. When people talk about
having a religious experience, this is what they mean. It's lost time,
a memory _of_ but not _during_.

I don't remember playing the song. There's a 7-minute gap in my memory
of that Sunday—I can remember the song being over and the silence that
fell over the room. Some were still swaying, some still had their
hands in the air. I could see my ride cymbal was still vibrating, but
I couldn't hear anything. In that moment, we were all one; reposed in
worship:

>  But God has so composed the body, giving greater honor to the part
>  that lacked it, that there may be no division in the body, but that
>  the members may have the same care for one another. If one member
>  suffers, all suffer together; if one member is honored, all
>  rejoice together. Now you are the body of Christ and individually
>  members of it[^1].

I don't remember coming down off the stage, I don't remember what Jeff
said that day, I don't remember talking to anyone after the
service. What I'll never forget, though, is what that minute after the
song ended felt like, that ineffable synchrony, and I'm thinking now,
more than 7 years later, if that's a manifestation of God that I've
been missing all along.

[^1]: 1 Corinthians 12:24-27
