---
layout: post
title: "TBD"
tags:
  - HoTT
---

This is a thing I do. I like to learn things by finding the thing I want to learn, and then work my way down as I encounter unknowns, exposing layers like an epistemological onion. A truth vegetable.

The current outermost layer is Homotopy Type Theory which is put forth by [the HoTT Book](https://homotopytypetheory.org/book/). Per usual, as I dig down beneath the _tunic_ I'm reminded that, for all intents and purposes, I know nothing and I spiral out of control wiki link after wiki link.  My only respite a term I actually understand. It could be argued that this is called "learning", but that label is dubious.

### Homotopy

Digressions aside, Homotopy is, in my best attempt at lucidity, a continuous function that can map between two functions, say <code>f,g: A &rarr; B</code> mapping from the same space to another same space. If this function exists, and we'll call it `H`, then those two maps are homotopic. Formally, it looks like this:

<pre>
f,g: A &rarr; B
H: A x [0,1] &rarr; B
H(x, 0) = f(x)
H(x, 1) = g(x)
</pre>

To put this in English: We've convered the first line.  That's our two maps: `f` and `g`. The second line is illustrating the what `H` maps: the _product_ of X and the unit interval to Y. A product in this case means `and`. As a quick explanation of product in this context, we can refer to some Haskell:

{% highlight haskell %}

-- This is a sum type, i.e. an or. Meaning a Maybe' can be either a Just' a or
-- Nothing.
data Maybe' a = Just' a | Nothing'

-- While this is a product, an and. The tuple is the product of something of
-- type a and something of type b.
data Tuple' a b = (a, b)
{% endhighlight %}

The unit interval however, is another scale to the onion.

The unit interval is the set of all the real numbers between 0 and 1. We use the bounds of this interval to be equal to our two maps given some `x`. This means that our `H`, our homotopy, is a function which through a transfinite series of inputs can "bend" `f` into `g`.

That, in a nutshell is homotopy. But, as I delved deeper, like anything worth learning, that nascent intuition was simply a prerequisite.

### Univalence
